Israel has targeted education in its war
on Gaza it's destroying schools and
universities and has killed thousands of
students and teachers yet learning and
teaching still go on in tense and
makeshift classrooms how and why does
gaza's educational Spirit remain so
strong this is Inside Story
[Music]
hello welcome to the program I am
Hashim education is the most powerful
weapon which you can use to change the
world so said the late South Africa
leader Nelson Mandela the spirit of his
words live on today in Gaza through the
determination of teachers and students
to ensure learning continues despite
Israel's genocidal aggression for
decades despite Wars and occupation
students from Gaza have excelled
internationally in fields like medicine
engineering and the Sciences as well as
arts and the humanities too Israel
clearly recognizes the importance of
Education to people in Gaza manifested
through its destruction of most of the
strip schools and universities some
demolished by Dynamite when air strikes
weren't enough educational leaders like
Professor have been assassinated while
thousands of students and teachers have
been killed in the war so how does
education keep going in Gaza what's the
long-term impact of Israel's war on this
generation of school children and
students there we'll be discussing all
these issues with our guest shortly
first this report from Laura
Khan education can shape the future and
change lives but that's far from the
reality these children face in their
makeshift School in
kanun they're determined to learn in the
ruins of their teachers
home there's a strong response from the
children as they want to return to
education instead of wandering the
streets or feeling lost our goal is to
provide activities and help alleviate
the psychological pain that children are
experiencing that includes anxiety fear
and the trauma from the things they have
seen around 625,000 registered students
would you to go back to school in Gaza
this week yet this is the state of the
education infrastructure in the strip
85% of school buildings have been
damaged or completely destroyed and
nearly 10,000 students
killed the UN says the few schools Still
Standing are being used as shelters for
those without anywhere to go and even
those are being attacked by Israel's
military the UN relief and works agency
says no official schooling is available
in any of its 200 schools with many of
them being used as shelters for
displaced Palestinians the agency says
its teams are still providing
recreational activities and psychos
social support in some of its
schools Gaza traditionally has a high
literacy rate among its youth many who
attended un schools have gone on to
excel in high level professions
including NASA engineer Lai albas uni
and writer poet and Professor rafat al-
arir who taught and inspired generation
of young Palestinian writers in the
strip if we stop caring about stories if
we stop telling our stories if we stop
listening to our
parents we create space we create vacuum
for others to occupy this virtual space
in our past in our heart Alara was
killed in an Israeli air strike in
December he attended the Islamic
University of Gaza that was destroyed in
an air strike last year libraries and
lecture the theaters that once
facilitated students dreams are now just
remnants of War this was isra University
a modern Hub where engineering law and
finance were taught to thousands of
students it's one of all 12 universities
that have been
destroyed among streets that are no
longer recognizable lie Twisted Metal
and piles of concrete and children
clutching pens and
paper plastic sheeting used in tents
provides no security the Persistence of
the children of Gaza to learn reflects
their resilience and their hope that
there must be a better future than the
reality they live
in Laura Khan for Inside Story Al to
zero let's bring in our guest in Gaza
Omar Salah is an English teacher at the
University College of applied science
says he was awarded a place at Durham
University in the UK but couldn't leave
because of the war on Gaza in Los
Angeles L basun who's from Gaza is a
Power Electronics lead engineer who
worked on the Ingenuity Ms helicopter
team with NASA GPL and was educated in
the trip in Doha Ahmed is the co-founder
of we are not numbers a Palestinian
youth Le nonprofit project in Gaza
welcome to the program gentlemen Omar do
you have any idea of your St students
are still alive or constantly on the
move from a shelter to
another thank you for having me first
and U actually we are uh we have been
recently started working on
um online teaching asynchronous online
teaching because we can do this a
synchronous way and uh despite all the
challenges and the and all the
difficulties we are facing these days uh
from electricity from from a place for
Education there's no it's really really
hard to find a place for education and
and well equipped also many of my
students uh sadly were killed during the
genocide and uh we are talking not just
we are talking about more than 600,000
students who were deprived from the
education from the right of Education
it's a whole it's a whole generation
actually and uh and my University it's
myself Islamic University I have been uh
deprived also from continuing my
Master's Degree uh
drat made his so rest in peace he was my
supervisor and in my ma thesis but
uh I I couldn't he he was murdered uh
and and I'm not able to continue my
education they are giving a p priority
to other students who are studying
bachelors and it's not just our alleng
from the the teachers uh side despite
all that so also students side students
are not able to find a place to for
Education internet is really SC you
can't find a good place for internet and
you're not talking about just uh
browsing it's it's uh you need to watch
videos you need to download lectures you
need to have exams so it's all a in
asynchronous way uh which is really
difficult and many students are trying
to leverage cafes they go to cafes they
are there are some internet uh points in
the streets they Tred to connect with it
and it's really really weak internet
connection so despite all that we're
talking about internet connection uh
there's a problem with a place you can't
find a place most students are going try
to move miles to a place to find a good
place for for learning okay uh it could
be this is one of those moments where
the top priority for students in Gaza is
just to fetch water food and help their
par as their biggest concern is their
own Survival could you share your your
feelings with us when you see those
pictures of children walking between the
rubble on the streets of Gaza I mean
it's really it's really sad uh like the
level I mean how how bad you know like
life God in Gaza uh I mean it's a
constantly Massacre every day uh you
know like there is no safe place you
know I mean you see a lot of these
students you know trying I mean a lot I
mean a lot of kids you know like you
just try to go after their you know just
securing water I mean I talked to a lot
of my cousins there I mean honestly like
education become a secondary thing I
mean most most schools I went to I mean
I don't know if there is any of them
actually still intact I mean every
single one have been bombed uh you know
so I mean but in the same time you know
I mean I see kids actually recently like
about a couple weeks ago I got a call
from one of the one of the professors
from Department of Education who
actually was trying to coordinate a talk
he was like you know teacher ing a class
in in a tent so I mean you know seeing
these kids still like have hope you know
trying to be educated you know they were
even still able to laugh uh I mean
that's giv me a lot of hope I mean I
don't think anybody I mean Israel always
targeted educational system in Palestine
I mean in Gaza even during during you
know their civil administration of Gaza
I mean there like many times they were
closing our schools for any reason they
just like make an execu then school will
be closed for month at a time so a lot
of time we had to actually study at home
you know we had to like you know I mean
people like always educated themselves
you know so I mean that that will never
stop so I mean there will always be hope
and you know no matter how many school
they take down we just we will rebuild
them Ahmed do you see the Relentless
bombardment of schools and universities
as a policy to take away that Spirit of
resilience among the Palestinians
particularly in Gaza
uh I believe yes of course Israel since
the beginning of this war and even
before this war Israel took it upon them
themselves to destroy the economy of
Gaza the education in Gaza the spirit of
the people in Gaza and even we have to
to talk about this even before this
genocide started Israel had a policy to
of ethnical cleansing in the West Bank
and the first thing they would do in
order to evacuate a village they would
destroy the the the primary school in
that in that Village and then they would
force people to go out of of their homes
and lands this is a policy of ethnical
cleansing this is a policy of genocide
that Israeli practice on the people in
Gaza and Israel knows that the people of
Gaza care a lot about education we are
the most highly educated people in the
Middle East and we care a lot about
education so Israel destroys the the uh
institutional the educational
institutions in Gaza because they wanted
to make it impossible to to the people
of Gaza to live so that they eventually
leave so this is a part of the ethnic
cleansing policies that Israel is
practicing on the people of Gaza and of
course it is measured it is calculated
it is
intentional could you tell us what are
your options next are you thinking
about inventing new ways so that you can
reach out to your students and help them
navigate this particular year well uh
actually I'm doing my best uh I have a
decent internet connection in my uh camp
and uh we are trying to uh to if if the
most thing you can do is to if there if
there's any inquiries or if children are
facing any problem so we are leveraging
some um of the classroom so students
send their inquiries and if they have
need need questions or anything they can
contact me by number or they can uh uh
email or anything so uh it's not just uh
on my individual side I do my best to
help but it's really it's it's it's out
of my hands because I'm also a student
and uh I'm doing my best to help because
I'm having this problem so the best way
I can do is to uh try to if they have
any problem they contct me to do
anything uh but but I'm thinking about
is you you're you're talking about
uh this is a deliberate Act of Killing
and and uh it's a part of the genocide
actually targeting the academics and and
the students it's about
3,679 students were killed during the
genocide and they are they are targeting
the pillar univers educational uh uh
facilities like the Islamic University
other university and my University as
well the place where I'm working it's
fully demolished they are not just
targeting
anything they they're deliberating doing
that and I I believe that education is a
source of peace and it's a way of of
resistance all also the colonizer knows
that when when this when this community
or this country are well educated they
will resist they will understand but if
if this if we suppress them then we we
will colonize them mentally and
physically they need the best they
trying their best to not just uh put us
down in terms of killing and destruction
but also they're trying to do this
mentally okay you you said you're
hopeful uh God will tap into that Spirit
of resilience and continue despite all
the odds but the Ministry of Education
the Palestinian Ministry of Education is
saying that 90 all the schools are shut
in Gaza 90% completely destroyed how do
you see the educational system rebuilt
in the near future in Gaza I mean you
know that you know the school system I
you know when I went to school I mean I
remember my first grade I mean we're in
a tent you know I mean because our class
was being rebuilt and the school time so
I mean that did not stop us I mean we
still have teachers we still have
students that's the only thing you need
somebody who really wanted to be to want
to be educated and I think you cannot
kill that Spirit schools are just a
place they're just a tool uh but you
know I mean the most important actually
this the students and their spirit so I
mean once we get once we can stop this
genocide I mean there will be a lot of
opportunities to grow I mean you know I
think the education would continue
whether without their schools I mean you
know I mean schools you know in the past
I mean there were just probably tents
you know could you know people could
just study in a tent could people study
on their own you know you cannot really
stop the spirit of somebody who really
want to learn and improve and better
themselves so and I I think that's what
we really have uh I mean everything else
is just a tool that will assist us to
advance further you know we can't
constantly under suppression you know to
even like you know like even the
suppress our voices as educated
Palestinian to just because they don't
really like the word to see examples of
of like successful Palestinian Ahmed
625,000 gazans already Ved likely to
miss the school for the ne second year
another 58,000 6 year olds who have
registered for the first time for their
first grade we're talking about a
logistical nightmare even if the
International Community is willing to
commit cash and all the means tomorrow
to try to put together a smooth year for
students in
is it likely to happen is it
workable I think the situation is more
uh dangerous than this let's imagine
that today the war ends let's imagine
that today the genocide ends what about
the mental health of the people in Gaza
what about the mental health of the
students in Gaza we already know that
before the genocide in Gaza over 80 or
90% of the students in Gaza suffered
from psychological and mental uh
disorder now after everything that they
have been through during the past here
how do you think these students will be
able to go to school to study to get
themselves educated this is a huge
problem but I have all the all the the
faith in the world in the Palestinian
people I know that we will continue to
study we will continue to go to schools
whether they were tense or not but I
mean right now we need to have this
genocide end we need to stop this war
and then after that we will need a lot
of support we will need a lot of help
from organizations from schools from
governments so that we can rehabilitate
the educational system in Gaza Omar
briefly if you don't mind the Ona has
launched the back to learning program in
45 of its shelters where basically you
have the children children uh the
teachers sitting with the with the
students trying to set up games drama
Arts music and different sports
activities for them just to get a a
semblance of what should be a normal
time vibrant uh uh School Vibe is there
something that you that could be
expanded across Gaza do you see it
happening across Gaza in the upcoming
weeks actually in the in the upcoming
weeks really it's really really hard and
because most of the schools the ownable
schools are being used as shelter for
displaced people and U they are not even
uh ready where did they take this old
people out in order to start the
educational system it's really hard but
uh what I'm thinking what what I'm
seeing actually is uh some organizations
like uh uh like for example save save
the children organization they're trying
to make something
uh to to in each Camp the for example in
our camp it's it's not the organization
it's our initial initiative we have a
tent we try to educate the teach the our
people our children in the camp uh the
way we can uh because those
children specifically in the primary
levels they are in need for to be
educated because their mind is not well
established they need to keep being uh
the their mind need to be uh active all
the time and you we can't ignore them so
we're trying to help them teach them in
the tent what the way we can and some
organizations are supporting that they
are doing tents in the in the camps and
teaching children specifically in the
primary levels and that that's the most
thing they are able to do but for H
schools I'm not saying this is easy it's
really hard but if the genocide ends uh
there will be a solution for that uh
schools that all about an end to the war
in Gaza you've been talking time and
again about education has been a source
of Pride among the Palestinians
particularly in Gaza you were born in uh
uh uh Gaza you were educated there you
moved to the United States of America
you became uh an engineer then you
helped the Mars helicopter Ingenuity
program which completed 72 hours
historic flight becoming the first
aircraft to achieve a power control
flight on another Planet it's phenomenal
by by a young child who comes from a
place like Gaza but do you have any
concerns that despite all the optimism
you still think about we could end up
now with a Lost Generation for many many
years to come I mean you know we
definitely lost time you know so I mean
I think you know Ian I don't know if I
would say Lost Generation I mean you
know I mean every I mean it's reallyy
sad you know I mean what's happening I
mean it's really depressing honestly but
in the same time like I I don't know if
we like lost a generation I mean we lost
a year or two I mean you know I I use my
father for example he had to because of
the 1967 war school was canceled for a
year and his exam was canceled and he
had he spent two years before he was
able to go to medical school so you know
you I mean we didn't really lose that
generation you know so I mean you know
just if we look at the past I mean in
1948 the same thing happened uh you know
but we you know that that just made us
more stronger to continue to prove that
we are worthy you know to be like to let
make the word recognize who we are
recognize the work we have provide the
word you know in term of education and
other knowledge which is I mean you
Palestine in history I mean it's always
been a source of knowledge you and no
matter what happens we always going to
rebuild I mean yes there is a lot of
trauma affect the students you know I
mean I think a lot of people probably
like at this point probably hopeless you
know but I think I think we'll overcome
that uh I think the biggest thing will
be like how is this whole system I mean
a systematical attack here it's not only
on education it's on even you know like
you know on the H there's a lot of
there's a lot of propaganda being spread
about education of Palestinians uh you
know I mean directly by Netanyahu I mean
you know it's like which is you know but
it's like you know there's a lot of it
is just like unfounded like excuses and
you know just part partially like to
delete the Palestinian identity you know
so you know but I I don't think they
will be able to succeed at any of that
and you know okay I think our our our
kids will have you know will still have
future whoever want to really be
educated they will find their ways Ahmed
you also have a story to share you lost
21 members of your family in October you
launched a platform we're not just
numbers so people can share their own
stories about the agony and the blight
of the people in Gaza are people in the
west receptive to your the content that
you publish on the platform oh thank you
very much um I lost the 21 members of my
family in October but two of my sisters
who were killed in that home were
teachers 14 of my nieces and nephews who
were killed most of them were pupils who
go to school and uh one of our
co-founders if we are not numbers was
this great amazing prominent Professor
he was a mentor to us he said in his
last words if I must die you must live
to tell my story so we are living right
now those who of us who survived this
massacre who survived this genocide we
are living to tell our stories to the
world now when we are not numbers we we
chose we decided to write our stories in
English for the Western audiences
because we know how the mainstream media
in the west have failed the Palestinian
people they have demonized and
dehumanized the Palestinian people we
are thighing our stories ourselves
because we want to get ourselves ex
exposed to the Western audiences of
course there is a lot of reception uh in
the west especially because the people
in the west now more than ever they
realize how they were deceived by their
own media how they were blinded by their
own media so there is a lot of reception
that we're receiving in the West A lot
of people are reading our stories for
the first time they're reading and
they're changing their perception about
we are not numbers about people in Gaza
because they're reading stories firstand
from the victims of a human right
violations in Gaza I have different
angles to cover with you gentlemen so if
you can be uh brief in your answer I
would really appreciate Omar will
virtual schools be the Practical best
alternative now for now uh the most
practical way to keep the uh the the
educational system is using the online
teaching but it is really it's somehow
impossible to do the synchronous
teaching which is like a live uh uh
lecture something where we are
leveraging the asynchronous way of
teaching and stud we have we give
students time we give them like
deadlines like we give them uh some a
huge period to do the deadlines uh to do
their Stu work and uh to to submit their
exams because we know that they are not
able uh it's hard it it's challenging
and somehow sometimes students have to
move like miles in order to get uh to
get the place and even it's not well
equipped for uh for education and for us
teachers there are some some places like
hubs if if you know that like work
hubs we have one we can go there but
it's
also what's available but it's
hard I believe
that sorry it's a it's a quick fix for
the time
being yes but I believe if we back to
our uh ancestors we back to our
grandfathers who who were displaced in
1948 uh they started from they started
from T they start from very basic
things the solution is not a very it's
not hard to start the the educational
system it's just a mentality and it's
it's a prophecy to keep to surpass to
surpass it to the generations and each
generation comes give it give it to the
other generation and it's like a
prophecy so we need to try to keep to
keep that cycle go ongoing as much as we
can look un agencies are facing a
problem which is basically they've been
asking for donations to be able to put
together the education system
particularly in Gaza in the near future
when the war is over but as you know the
donors are not really excited about the
potential of injecting more cash into
education because they say they have
other priorities food Aid hospitals and
so on and so forth what could be
the best scenario what should the
Palestinians do or neighboring countries
Arabs in particular wealthy Nations to
try to help the Palestinians when it
comes to rebuilding educational system
in the future yeah I mean that's what I
was like talking I mean there's like the
big you know systematical attack on the
organization like for own which is like
bringing a lot of the funding and then
you destroy I guess the majority the
majority of their infrastructure so now
you know they already were struggling
with budget before this you know
especially with some country reducing
their budget so I mean so that that
there will be there will be like a big
like fiscal problem in term of like
funding and the priority of the funding
because now it's like you know like
going to become like the health care the
education that you know the education
probably come secondary because you know
we just trying to make people survive
and give them food so a lot of the is
going there way uh so I mean we you know
there need to be like more uh you know
like to help you know rebuild a lot of
the school so they're going to need to
be like a lot more funding uh you know
TOA or to other organization to allow to
allow the tools to to make it more
accessible for every single s single
person to be actually be able to go to
to get education Ahmed what would be the
best way to prevent a second year
without access to school for people in
Gaza even if the war
continues the war has to end we can't
allow this continue this to continue we
can't allow this genocide to continue
for more than a year enough is enough I
think it is time that everyone every
single person every single organization
or all the governments they have to come
and agree that this war has to end and
when this war ends there has to be a lot
of work done in Gaza we need a lot of
support us Palestinians alone in in Gaza
after this genocide I don't think we
have enough capacity to revive and
rehabilitate the educational system we
need a lot of help from the
organizations NOS human rights
organizations we need a lot of help with
the resources with the funding and but
also and most importantly we need to
have this war end and we need to make
sure that no more genocides happen to
the Palestinian
people ahed I really appreciate your
time the stories that you shared with us
which are definitely going to resonate
among the young children in Gaza
desperate to go back to school despite
the Relentless bombardment and the
massive loss of life thank
you and thank you too for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website al.com for further
discussion go to our Facebook page
that's
facebook.com/ inside story you can also
join the conversation on X our handle is
at AJ insid story from me Hashim and the
entire team here in Doha bye for now
[Music]